So what about the tooling provided by the virtual machine itself?
Jstat is a command line tool that lets us run various monitoring commands.
It lets us look at things like class loading, for example.
But the commands we care about here at all to do with a garbage collector.
So, for example, we can run commands to look at the garbage collector's capacity.
So how much memory has been allocated for each part of the garbage collector?
We could run a gcutil command,
which gives us various statistics on the garbage collector.
And we can run the full gc command,
which shows the information about an ongoing garbage collection,
such as how many garbage collects have happened and some
timings around those garbage collections.
There are also other commands around causes of the garbage collection
and various other timing commands we could also run.
The general form of jstat is something like this.
We do a jstat, we pass it an option, we pass it a process ID,
and the process ID here we need to find out. This is our Java process ID.
So we can pass jstat at interval,
and this can be a time in seconds or milliseconds,
and that tells jstat to produce this output at that interval.
And we can also give it a count.
And again, this is optional.
If we pass it an interval, but not a count, then the count defaults to infinity.
We can basically tell jstat how many lines of output we require here.
We'll also find that jstat can work with remote JVMs as well.
So we can pass this a URL that identifies the Java VM on a
remote machine and monitor that virtual machine.
So to demonstrate jstat in action,
we have a reasonably simple Java application here.
This Java application uses the GCMe class that we've seen previously.
This is quite a large class here. So when we allocate an instance
of this class, we get a large memory allocation, and it's got 10
long variables inside the class.
When we allocate an object of this class, we'll store that reference
inside an array, and the array holds a million elements, and we store it
at some random location inside the array. Initially, we'll be storing new
objects at empty slots inside the array,
and those obviously will be referenced by the array. So
those objects will not be garbage collected.
But eventually, as we fill the array up when we start allocating
objects, we'll overwrite already existing references, and those existing
objects no longer being referenced will be GCed.
What we should see are a number of young garbage collections
happening and a number of old garbage collections happening and
that this memory gets freed. So firstly,
if we run this application, we can see the application is running.
We're printing out a dot here every so many allocations.
I think it's every 100,000 allocations.
So we can see this thing is taking over quite happily here.
And then what I now want to do from another command prompt is run jstat
and gather some information about this application.
So before we do that,
we need to find the process ID of the application, and we do that by
running jps. And jps shows us the current Java applications that are
running here, and AllocationOverwrite has a process ID of 5456. So if
I run jstat ‑gcutil 5456, then we should get some information about
the application.
So what we are seeing here are some percentages, so S0, S1, E, O, and M
are percentages of the total memory space used by these various spaces,
so survivor space 01, Eden space, old space,
something called a meta space.
So Eden space, for example,
is using up 100% of the young generation space at the moment. We're also
seeing some counts. So YGC is the number of young garbage collects that
have happened, and FGC is the number of full garbage collects that have
happened, and then the T values of these are the average times for those
garbage collections.
If I run gccause rather than gcutil, you'll see similar figures.
Time has moved on here, so we can see there have been many
more young garbage collection counts, and many were full
garbage collection counts.
We can also see the causes of the garbage collections as well.
And LGCC is the cause of the last garbage collection, and GCC is
the cause of the current garbage collection.
And in both cases,
we see the garbage collector ran because there was an allocation
failure, i.e. there was no memory available.
If we run gccapacity here,
this will give us information about the amount of memory allocated for
the various regions inside the garbage collector.
So these fall into minimum, maximum, and current for the
young generation and for the old generation.
So NGCMN is the minimum allocation for the new garbage collector, and NGCMX
is the maximum allocation for the new garbage collector. NGC is the amount
of memory currently allocated for the new garbage collector. S0C and S1C are
the survivor space allocations, and EC is the Eden space allocation. And if
you total up EC and the SCs, they should total to the allocation for the new
generation. 8704 + 8704 + 69952 comes to 87360. So again, for the old region,
we have OGCMN, OGCMX, OGC allocated, and OC, which is
the capacity for the old generation.
So finally, what about GC stats? So if we run jstat ‑gc against this process,
then currently, we get a single row of output. And again, we're
showing information about each of the generations here.
So S is a survivor, E is Eden, O is old.
So we have S0C and S1C are the capacity for the survivor spaces.
S0U and S1U are the utilization for survivor spaces. EC and EU are
the Eden capacity and the Eden utilization. OC and OU are old
capacity and old utilization.
And if we look off to the right here, we'll see we have a YGC.
That's the number of young generation garbage collects. And YGCT is the
type. FGC is the number of full garbage collects. And again, FGC time, the
time for the full garbage collects to happen.
So here on this at an interval,
let's say every second, we'll get it to print out 10 rows here.
Then, we should see the number of young garbage collects rising, and we should
also see the number of full garbage collects rising as well.
You'll notice the young garbage collect count goes from 1837 to 1862, and
the full garbage collection count goes from 1825 to 1850. And we notice
the times for these things are increasing as well. So we can use this tool
to monitor the number of garbage collections that are happening, and we
can also use it to monitor how quickly they're happening, and we can use
it to check the way our application responds to different garbage collectors.